and then like i go to sleep the next day
i wake up i go to class and what do i
feel as i walk into the classroom that
shame arises again and says hey go sit
at the back
and then suddenly that some scar is now
controlling my behavior now i've made a
shift in my personality and i go and sit
at the back of the classroom so
today we're going to talk a little bit
about personality and the interesting
thing about personality is that we tend
to view personality as static right and
so we say like oh i am this way or i am
that way but there's actually
overwhelming evidence that personality
changes over time so for example there
are even things called personality
disorders which are when someone's
personality is so extreme in a
particular dimension that it interferes
with their ability to like form
relationships and be successful in life
and so we actually diagnose it as a
pathological condition
the good news is that even if you have a
personality disorder it's treatable and
changeable right so you can like if you
have a personality disorder like if
you're a narcissist there are things
that you can learn and change about your
personality to shape it in the right
direction
so today what i'm going to talk to you
all about is how do we shape our
personality
now this is something that we're going
to lean heavily on sort of the eastern
perspective and i'm going to start by
explaining kind of why
so western understanding of personality
tends to be at a population level right
so if we look at the best
validated western scientific construct
of personality it's the five factor
model which divides personality into
five dimensions and you can assess
someone's like
level on each of these dimensions so how
open are they how agreeable are they how
extroverted are they how conscientious
are they so how neurotic are they so
those are like the five dimensions
but the thing about western personality
analysis is it's not individual so it's
like population based so what you could
say is that you can you know rank
someone's neuroticism and you can say
this person is highly neurotic and you
can give them an individual you can give
a scenario and you can say okay how is
this person going to behave
what are they going to how are they
going to interact in this scenario and
you can't really make
a concrete behavioral prediction right
you can sort of say in general
highly neurotic people or highly
agreeable people will behave this way
versus low agreeable people are less
likely to behave that way so you're
talking about populations you're talking
about probabilities which is very good
it's like kind of how western science
works
but
it's not individual right so if you have
high neuroticism
how you specifically behave and how to
shape your individual personality
is not something that western science is
actually like an expert at because
western science tends to look at the
population level in averages right so
even the model of the five factor model
is to try to average out
a bunch of individuals to figure out
what are these five characteristics that
are like generally speaking applicable
to everyone so it's a very
population-based system
so this is not
and people may sort of assume for a
moment that that's the only way you can
do things right how can you measure
things at an individual level and like
you absolutely can that's literally what
you do as a clinician right so as a
clinician i have all of this data about
personality and depression and
epidemiology but at the end of the day
an individual comes into my office and i
have to make individual decisions based
on their individual personality and try
to help them move forward right so you
can have an evidence-based treatment
that works for a personality disorder
but once you get in the room with an
individual you have to apply that
treatment at a level that there's no
there's going to be no randomized
controls trial that is going to teach
you
what is going to work 100 for an
individual patient in your office
the eastern perspective on personality
though i think is far more applicable to
an individual level and the reason for
that is because the yogis were like
looking at an n of one right they
weren't studying external things they
were studying things internally so they
asked the question how does my mind work
right and they looked at what was going
on in their mind and so they had perfect
information on one person
but questionable whether it applied to
anyone else so we're going to use that
model today so the way that we're going
to understand how to shape our
personality has a few steps the first is
that we're going to talk a little bit
about what is personality how do we
define personality like like literally
what is it once we understand what it is
we can move on to okay so now that we
know what it is how does it get
constructed so like where does it come
from
once we understand how it gets
constructed and where it comes from we
can start to make alterations in the way
that we are shaping our personality
because now we understand how it gets
put together so we can change how we put
it together
at this point we're going to talk a
little bit about how most people shape
their personalities and then an
alternative to the way that most people
do it okay let me use some gaming
analogies there and then we'll hopefully
leave you with sort of an idea of how
you can go about shaping your
personality in a particular direction
and this this sort of makes sense
because if you look at monks for example
right so like people who are very
spiritually adept they seem chiller they
seem calmer they're more open to things
they're able to be like more resilient
there's all kinds of you know data we
talked about adhd and parenting the
other day where we there was a study
that showed that mindful parenting
reduces symptoms of child adhd and
improves like parenting behaviors and so
if you kind of think about that like how
does that work right like what's going
on in the mind of the person of the
parent where you can teach them a
particular way of behaving which then
over time will shape their personality
which results in like all kinds of
benefits so you can absolutely adjust
your personality through essentially
spiritual practices like meditation
things like that right maybe not
spiritual anymore they're starting
starting to become scientific this is
what the yogis did they like learned how
to be like less reactive to stuff more
open to things um they're more motivated
more driven like more focused uh you
know they're able to control what they
eat so they shape all kinds of things
about themselves
and so we're going to share that with
y'all okay
so the first
is what is personality so how do we know
whether your personality is like
different from someone else's
personality right you are an individual
you have your own personality maybe
you've got a friend you've got a partner
you've got a parent you've got a sibling
and they have a different personality so
if i was an alien
observing people from space how would i
figure out whether two people have
different personalities or the same
personality right
and so essentially what personality is
is our individual way of reacting to a
particular scenario
so if someone rings my doorbell do i you
know open it up right away or do i like
peek through the window to see who it is
so like people will do all kinds of
different behaviors
given a common scenario the first day
when i go to class where in the
classroom do i sit do i sit in the front
do i sit all the way in the back do i
sit somewhere in the middle do i try to
sit away from other people do i try to
sit next to certain people how do i
select who i sit
close to right so all of these even if
we take an individual scenario
and we present
10 people with the same scenario it is
their reaction to that scenario and how
they behave that shapes their
personality so my personality is a
combination of where i sit in the
classroom with what i do first thing in
the morning how i open the door to my
house you know what i do when someone
cuts me off when i'm driving you know
like how i relate to someone who is 15
minutes late for a date that we're
supposed to be on so all of this
constellation of how i behave
with the outside world determines my
personality right
and so like each of these individual
things i may overlap with some people in
some ways so for example
at the very beginning of of my college
career i started sitting at the front
because i was a try-hard and up at the
front were all of the other tryhards and
then gradually over time as i started to
fail my classes and stuff like that i
started to sit towards the back because
then i was ashamed and i didn't answer
any of the questions and i tried to
disappear into my seat most of the time
i was in the class right and then
towards like medical school i sort of
sat off to the side because i was just
kind of like doing my own thing i'll let
the tryhards be in the front i'll let
the failures be in the back and i'm just
going to be like chilling like doing my
own thing on the side and then there
were the side sitters that came and
joined me and we got along great right
so there are these like shared
personality characteristics which you
can see in an individual scenario
but it's not like all the side sitters
are also like all the door peekers right
like there's all kinds of different
they're not the same people as the road
ragers
and so while there are shared
characteristics essentially personality
is the way that you respond to a
particular scenario and when we take all
of the different ways that you respond
or react or you're inclined to behave in
a particular scenario and we put them
all together that is the personality
that is the individual you okay
so then the question kind of becomes
okay like where does the personality
come from right so if these are all your
individual reactions to particular
scenarios how does your mind know how to
behave
what is your in where does your
inclination come from
so this is where we're going to move to
a little bit of sunscreen okay
so
in
so the yogis essentially came up with
a handful of terms to understand the
mind okay
so we talked about what is personality
right
so
let's just run through what we're going
to talk about today
so what is personality
right it is a constellation
of reactions
to scenarios
right it's the way that we interact with
the world
oh i see a little bit of lagging okay
next is
you know what are the components so like
where does personality come from
so then it kind of follows
that
you know like
our reactions to scenarios are going to
be based on our experiences right
so for example let's say i'm a front
sitter so i walk into the classroom and
i sit at the front and then i make an
observation
that if you're in the front you get
called on a lot more
as a result i get called on i don't know
the answer to a question i feel stupid
and then what's gonna happen is i've
been shaped a little bit right i've been
altered i've had an experience that then
makes me now
sit in the back
right so suddenly like in that moment my
personality has been shaped okay
so let's try to understand a little bit
about what are the components of the
mind so how did the yogis sort of figure
this out
the first thing that they noticed is
that there are there's a part of the
mind called the manus for those of you
that have watched dr k's guide you'll be
very familiar with this okay
so the minus is the emotional mind
and is judgmental
so it's like reactive
okay so for example
do you like pineapple on pizza some
people will say yes it's delicious some
people will say it is disgusting and it
is it is the sin of the greatest
magnitude
but if you think a little bit about how
you determine whether you like whether
you like it or not is irrelevant let's
think a little bit about how you decide
which camp you're in you take a bite of
it and then some part of your being says
yes this is amazing or oh this is awful
right oysters are another good example
of like some people are super into it
some people like this is slimy and cold
and
overly salty right
so the monus is essentially our reactive
mind that also experiences emotions
because emotions are also reactive right
so let's say that
you know i'm i walk into class one day
and then someone asked me a question
like hey how did you sleep last night
and then like i noticed everyone is
looking at me and they're like grinning
a little bit and it's like
what on earth is going on right so i
feel a little bit embarrassed i don't
understand what's happening logically
but my mind reacts to that scenario i
recognize that i'm the butt of the joke
in some way there's something weird
going on right so i'm on my guard i
answer very carefully so that that sort
of emotional response
is
like from the mana so it's like reactive
it's sudden it's quick
the next thing is our ahamkar
or our ego
or sense of self
okay so this is like our identity this
is not a reaction
it's not an emotion it is a sense of
self it's also not logical or analytical
it's just i believe i am this right so
it's like an ego generally speaking the
ahamkar acts to protect you from things
in the manus so when i'm feeling ashamed
of myself my ego my my ego or sense of
identity will do something to actually
alleviate that shame and sometimes it
can be kind of paradoxical
right so i'll give you guys just a
simple example of this if i'm feeling
like i'm a bad person i'm ashamed of
myself
the ahamkar can actually tell me yeah
you deserve that because you're nothing
you know you don't deserve any love so
if i like tell myself that i don't
deserve love
then i can't feel rejected because i
never should have gotten it in the first
place even though paradoxically
it may seem like that is actually
hurting you to determine your identity
as someone who doesn't deserve love if
you really think about it it's actually
really good armor right so if it's a
part of the natural order for you to not
be loved by another human being then
like life is far less painful because
everything sort of makes sense there's
like no hope you're just like insulated
from it right you start to become numb
so ego can be kind of bizarre
next thing is a some scar
so in the east
a constellation of some scars is our
personality so a samskar is
sort of an impression in the mind
that
is recalled
in a particular scenario
so it's like
activating programming okay in western
psychology the closest thing is a schema
from the cognitive behavioral
uh realm
so like for example
you know if i walk into the bathroom
like even if i've never been to that
bathroom before let's say i'm at a
restaurant my mind knows how to operate
the toilet in the bathroom right and how
does my mind know that it's because when
it sees the bathroom it recalls
particular programming it says oh we
need to access bathroom.exe
but
some scars are not just that simple so
they also get to be quite complex so
let's say that i'm in a relationship
where my partner has cheated on me and
as a result of like my partner cheating
on me i start to become distrustful and
then when i start to get into the next
relationship and my partner is 15
minutes late for a date
like
cheating.exe or cheatingparanoia.exe
starts to activate and so these like
pent-up emotions from my past
relationship start to project and come
out as malware in my current
relationship okay
and so that's another example of a sum
scar so we talk about some scars
oftentimes as like negative things
but they don't necessarily have to be
negative they're just programming in the
mind
okay
so then if we think a little bit about
personality
personality is a collect uh oh gg
okay that's okay we don't need it
so if we think about a little bit about
programming in the mind
we got to the sanskrit stuff which is
the important thing
okay
so we think about programming in the
mind
it's essentially like a collection of
some scars and then our collection of
some scars is our personality right
because like when we respond to
different things in different ways
whether i'm a
a front sitter or a back sitter depends
on the some scar of
getting called on in class so when i get
called on in class and i don't know the
answer that shame
make like makes an impression in my mind
goes dormant in my mind
and then like sits around and then
reactivates in particular scenarios okay
so the way that we form some scars is
essentially by improper digestion of
experiences so i'll give you guys just a
simple let's use that example okay so
if i have
um
so let's say i sit at the front of the
classroom and i get called on by my
teacher
and then like i don't know the answer so
then i feel ashamed of myself and then
there's like two different options at
that point right so i can sit i can
process the shame and i can kind of talk
to my friends about it i can talk to my
parents about it whatever and if i have
like a supportive group and i share my
feelings and i work through it you know
like maybe my dad says something like
well you know like i understand that it
was embarrassing for you so you've got
like two choices right you can either
study harder and therefore be prepared
and get called on or what you can do is
retreat to the back of the class you've
got either of those two options
but even understanding that you have
those two options involves a certain
amount of like processing and thinking
about your situation
okay so most people as they go through
life don't really process and think
through scenarios when they happen to
them right and generally speaking we're
not like actively processing stuff day
in and day out as stuff happens to you
in life you're not like sitting there
and like reflecting on it on a daily
basis you just kind of get up and live
your day and you have an accumulation of
experiences
as those experiences happen they tend to
go dormant right so let's say that
the school scenario again so i get
called on and uh sitting in the front
row i feel ashamed of myself and then i
go home and i feel shame right i feel
like kind of crappy so what do i do do i
sit there and think about it do i
process it no i turn on a video game
log on to some kind of social media or
content you know consumption website
and my mind disappears into the void for
like four hours
and then by then the shame is kind of
like calmed down some it hasn't been
processed
and then like i go to sleep the next day
i wake up i go to class and what do i
feel as i walk into the classroom that
shame arises again and says hey go sit
at the back
and then suddenly that some scar is now
controlling my behavior now i've made a
shift in my personality and i go and sit
at the back of the classroom and then i
feel a little bit relieved because okay
now i won't be called on it's like not a
big deal
as i leave class that day once again i
kind of remembered like oh maybe i could
have like sat at the front maybe i
should have read yesterday
instead of playing video games but like
that kind of makes me feel guilty i go
home
i'm feeling kind of guilty ah it's not
that big of a deal okay let me just play
games again so i play games again now i
don't feel even as prepared for school
the next day so the next day i go in i
kind of like go sit in the back and then
suddenly i've lost
right
it's like
my personality has been altered the way
that i've reacted to situations has been
altered
i'm now starting to be controlled by
some of these behaviors like shame and
guilt and stuff like that i'm starting
to dig a hole for myself and it's kind
of like gg
right so the way that we actually live
most of our life is the way that most
people play video games so i know this
sounds kind of weird but like if you
think about a competitive game
so once you calibrate for example to a
particular mmr in a competitive game
let's call it overwatcher lol or dota or
whatever
most people historically if you look at
most of the player base they will stay
at their particular skill for their
entire lifespan right so like
1500 mmr players will stay 1500 mmrs
like if you go to like if you play a
game of dota for example i just play
dota but this is true of law or
overwatch or call of duty or whatever if
you have a particular mmr there are
people who will have thousands of hours
played
and like will still suck at the game
right and if you kind of think about
that
it's kind of surprising like how can
thousa how can you play for thousands
and thousands and thousands of
hours and like still suck at the game
and like not get better
and this is the other interesting thing
is if you look at people who are at the
top of like let's say you look at the
challenger level in law or immortal rank
and in dota or whatever right or like
diamond rank and starcraft or masters
and starcraft or whatever game you want
to
a lot of times they don't they haven't
played more than like people who are
5000 mmr below them right there does not
appear to be thank you
there does not appear to be
a correlation between how many hours you
play and how good you are at the game
so you can be a professional player
right so like for example team spirit
one ti last year and i don't know how
many hours they've played dota but i can
guarantee you that there are people who
are 2000 mmr who have played the same
number of hours of dota so what this
sort of implies is actually something
that's quite staggering
which is that
most of like when we play video games we
don't think about the game afterward
right so how do we stay
low mmr despite thousands of hours of
play it's because we're like robots so i
play a game i like pick a random hero i
don't really like think about the game
after i don't watch my own replays
i don't like process or
credit like you know think about what
i'm doing critically i just queue up for
the next game i'm just kind of like on
autopilot
and as a result like i don't actually
get better right so i'm not gonna
improve my personality at dota the way
that i react to scenarios in the game
does not change because i'm not thinking
about them afterward so if i lose my
lane i'm just going to go and tp there
three times and just continue to feed
i'm not going to make any adjustments
because i haven't been critical about
the way that i played the game
and it actually happens to be exactly
the same way in real life right so as i
go through negative experiences
i don't actually process or think
critically about how i'm like what's
going on here right
i just sort of like autopilot it and so
i say the same damn mmr we start to
think about personality is static
and then we like just live our lives
with this personality right so then we
assign labels to ourselves we say i'm
lazy
i'm not a morning person
right i just can't do that i can't
handle parties
i'm like
i'm just not like i am not like that and
so you start to define things about
yourself which then start to doom you
right because now like if you're lazy
like gg noob like what can you do you
can try to biohack your way to whatever
you want to but like laziness plus all
these and this is why the biohacking
life hacking industry is so big it's
because people assign themselves with a
personality attribute
that is static and then like since
that's unchangeable i need to use some
kind of like broken op technique to
bypass my core personality
right that's like that's why this
industry is so big it's because you
don't need to change
you just need to take this herbal
supplement and your life will transform
right
so then the question becomes but like
can we gain mmr in a game of dota in in
the game of dota and the answer is
absolutely yes we can gain mmr right we
can think about what we do we can
reflect on what we can do
we can start to be intentional about how
we behave how we react to experiences
is actually not step away from
intentional intentionality of action for
a second but how we react and process
and digest experiences
will result in mmr gains right so if i
lose my lane i go watch the replay and i
realize okay this is a scenario where i
did a and i should have done b
so if i learn from that mistake then my
mmr will increase a little bit
and the interesting thing is that is
absolutely true in real life so the
first group of people who did this were
the yogis i mean maybe there were other
people i don't you know i don't know the
ancient history of africa for example so
there may have been people who predated
the yogis there but generally speaking
you know yoga is about five to six
thousand years old so like you know
3000 4000 bc or bce
you know like people were figuring this
out and essentially what even now we
sort of get this right we have a class
of people
like monks or yogis who we sort of
assume are like in control of their crap
right they're able to like wake up at
4am every day and like meditate for
three hours and like do yoga they're
able to like not be tempted by sexual
desires not be tempted or be able to
resist their sexual desires be able to
resist dietary desires be like be like
non-monetary things like that so we have
yogis out there who are like capable of
controlling all this crap
and we look at them and we're like you
know that that person does that because
they're a monk right that's their job
but if you really think about it now the
way that they react to scenarios is
is transformed drastically
because you had someone who used to
react this way this way this way this
way
and now the way they react to all those
scenarios has changed a lot so
essentially what they've done is altered
their personality right they've
literally changed the way that they
react to scenarios therefore that
becomes a personality alteration
and so then
if we kind of stop and think about it
for a second like there's a way they did
that right they consistently do that
this is a profession that consistently
trains people
to alter the way they react to scenarios
so this is like a group of super high
mmr people right this is like an
in-house league that only has immortal
players
so what i want to share with y'all today
is essentially like how to do that right
and it turns out to be actually
relatively simple
so if you want to start shaping your
personality instead of focusing on what
you do right so this is what everyone
focuses on they focus on the behavior
they're like how do i wake up early in
the morning
how do i study more how do i do this
this is my problem this is my problem
this is my problem they're always
focused on the problem and looking
forward
instead what you need to do is look at
your reactions to things
right so
if i lose a game of dota i'm thinking
how do i win the next game how what
should i pick and you guys may have
fallen into this trap where you get
crushed by a particular hero you're like
that hero is so freaking op i'm gonna
pick that hero i'm gonna win the game
it's gonna be easy i'm always looking
forward how do i fix this problem how do
i fix this our entire society is like
based on fixing problems right oh we've
got this thing that will help you fix
your problem we've got this biohack here
you know we're trying to fix this we're
trying to fix this is always moving
forward how do we increase quarterly
profits how do we increase how do we
sign bigger deals how do we have more
customers how do i get a raise how do i
get promoted it's always like looking
forward how to do better better better
better better better
so what we don't look at
is the way we react we react to things
and this is how we get stuck right so
what happens in the game of dota if i
get crushed by a particular hero and i
pick that hero because that hero's opie
i lose
right and then but hold on a second but
like that hero is so op
right so i need to be less lazy i need
to start drinking this supplement and
then my life will transform
you're always looking forward and so
your personality doesn't shape it
doesn't change because how is
personality shaped personality is not
shaped by what you do is shaped by how
you react
to particular scenarios it is your
default response two things and if you
can change your default response to
things your life will transform
i kid you not let's go back to the the
person who sits at the front of the
classroom answers a question in a
particular way
they get the question wrong they feel
ashamed of themselves and remember
there's two options right
so on the one hand i can
it's okay screw this i'm gonna avoid the
scenario i'm gonna sit at the back
option number one or wow like this
really felt bad i feel ashamed of myself
how am i going to react to that i'm
actually going to make sure i study
tomorrow i'm going to study tonight so
that tomorrow whenever i get asked a
question i'm going to be ready for it
and if you think about these two people
you say that these two people have
different personalities i wish i had
that other personality i wish when life
you know when i lost a game of dota i
learned from my mistake and went into
the next game like prepared to do even
better i wish that when i did poorly in
life when i got dumped by a boyfriend or
girlfriend that
i reacted stronger so that i would be
like a stronger human being instead of
resentful in my next relationship right
this is what we wish and what we all
focus on is how do i be healthier in my
next relationship how do i find a
successful relationship this is the
other problem that we run into with
relationships
is that when we have a bad relationship
we go and look for the perfect partner
right we look for a partner who will
like be less this way and more this way
and so you end up with online dating
profiles where everyone is looking for
like the perfect thing they're like oh
now i have access to the internet which
has like a hundred thousand people on it
so let me list out all of my
requirements and as long as i find the
right person i'm looking for mr right
i'm looking for mrs wright right all the
good ones are taken they're not
available anymore what i want is not
available it's out of stock
but instead what they should be doing is
if this particular person if this
relationship didn't go well
what was my contribution to it and this
is why people like it's so hard to date
online right now is because people have
stopped being like self-reflective like
people are just like instead of changing
myself at all what i'm looking for is
like some weird
you know frankenstein's monster or
chimera of like different pieces of
things that is assembled into the
perfect human that i want and i'm
looking for that thing and then like the
problem is that you may have found that
thing but that thing may not want to
date you because have you done any kind
of self-reflection
and so if we want to shape our
personality it's not about fixing the
problem
it's about looking at how we react to
particular scenarios because that's the
training of a monk the core training of
a monk is to look at their reactions to
things
right it's to eat something that they
find tasty or not tasty and study your
reaction to a particular thing
as you process that reaction as you work
through that reaction you will be free
of that personality change
now there is an overwhelming amount of
evidence that this is successful forget
about monks for a second let's go to
actual let's go back to science so the
practice of clinical psychotherapy is
essentially a formalized process of this
okay so when someone comes into my
office with a personality disorder this
is an aspect of their personality which
through
helping them change the way that they
react and study the way that they react
i can actually like help them over the
course of a year or two no longer become
narcissistic and if you think about that
like how on earth does that work and
what literally happens is someone will
come in and they'll say
you know christmas was a mess and i'll
say what happened well like someone like
didn't like they invited me but like
they didn't even think to ask me about
my dietary restrictions
and i'm kind of confused i'm like okay
well like you know they're your parents
don't they know your dietary
restrictions like why would they need to
ask you about them they're like well i
decided to go vegan three months ago and
they like didn't ask about that
it's like okay so your parents are 72
you're 41
and you're upset because your parents
didn't think to ask about dietary
restrictions
right like
i'm confused but that's what the
narcissistic person thinks they're like
i've made such a big change you know
they didn't even think to ask about it
and so i went there and there was like
no vegan food
and and so i you know i'm kind of
confused but like this is the mind of a
narcissistic person
so as we sit there and we sort of think
a little bit about okay so like what's
your expectation
right like what do you think they should
do like at what interval should they ask
you if you've made dietary restrictions
right and if you start to like ask these
kinds of questions it's it's quickly
becomes absurd
that you know your parents are gonna ask
you like what once every three months
once a year by the way if you decided to
go vegan like
you know people don't do that but in the
mind of a narcissistic person they don't
sort of realize that right so like their
reaction to this scenario is to feel
hurt and this in turn has to do with
their ahm god and prior some scars
because remember narcissism itself is a
consequence of some scottish and am god
so this person wasn't born narcissistic
they became narcissistic that way
so somewhere along the way people either
neglected their needs or they had a
parent who was narcissistic right so
like the parent was like always blaming
other people for like not asking them
questions or whatever so you can start
to like look at how that reaction formed
so in clinical psychotherapy what you
essentially do
is show people how they react to
scenarios
and as you focus on how you react to a
scenario you start to alter your own
perceptions you start to alter your
personality literally and you start to
change the way that you you behave it
becomes automatic right so and this is
the kind of thing if you guys have
played video games you understand this
like if i do replay analysis of my own
thing and i make a conclusion right i
realize oh i should have done this i
should have done this i should have done
this the next time i go into a game
that learning is gonna be like operating
in the background and it's gonna
automatically shape my behavior right
it's like if i decide oh i didn't buy
enough regen in lane
it's like oh crap so the next time like
i just go into the game i buy more regen
i walk into the lane and then like the
problem has solved itself
it's like and this is the most shocking
thing that i think people don't realize
everyone thinks fixing problems is hard
and it's like yes fixing problems is
hard but what's way easier is actually
fixing yourself
and then the problems downstream become
like easy to solve because you yourself
have changed your default mode of
operation has changed your personality
has changed so how do you do that
it comes down to studying your reactions
this is the biggest issue is we're so
focused on fixing the problem that we're
not looking at how we react to things so
now i know it sounds kind of like super
simple
but focus on your reaction so in a
particular situation this is like you
know we're gonna teach all of meditation
right so
consider a scenario and like when you go
into the scenario just notice yourself
okay i want you to pay attention to your
heartbeat pay attention to your pulse
pay attention to your you know your
breathing rate whether you're sweating
whether you're relaxed whether you're
like you know whatever is going on just
pay attention to yourself and notice
what your mind or your body is telling
you right so it's saying don't sit at
the front don't sit at the front don't
sit at the front so the first step is to
notice something okay
the next step is to play the tape
through to the end so as you sit down
and you kind of think about it i want
you to like this is tricky because
fears
don't live up under scrutiny okay so the
way that you kind of like overcome this
is like if your mind is telling you
like okay if we sit at the front
don't sit at the front front is bad
that's gonna be an instinctive reaction
it comes from the manus okay you're
gonna say don't sit at the front and so
instead your mind is like okay let's go
sit at the back and so play the tape
through to the end so ask yourself what
will happen if i sit in the front and
then your mind will be like we don't
want to get called on
and then
you know like you'll think okay so like
what will happen if we get called on
well we're not going to know the answer
well hold on a second like we may know
the answer right we may know the answer
we may not know the answer but in our in
our mind that fear assumes that we don't
know the answer so it's kind of like
bizarre right so like now we're being
shaped by a possibility it's not even a
probability like there's eight people in
the front row they the teacher asked us
yesterday there's actually a decent
chance we won't get asked at all
so play the tape through the end okay if
we get asked the question what maybe we
know the answer maybe we don't know the
answer okay what's the consequence of
not knowing the answer well i'm gonna
feel stupid
are you gonna
get a bad grade no
well i'm gonna feel dumb
okay
so what
well i don't like to feel dumb okay
so like
are you willing to like give it a shot
like let's just see what happens let's
like see just pay attention and so like
when you combat that fear like at the
end of the day you're going to kind of
hit up that fear of like i don't want to
feel dumb
and now you've got two options so if i
know it sounds kind of bizarre but even
doing this amount of study may be enough
for you to sit at the front of the
classroom
and if you do get called on and you
don't know the answer notice your
reaction to that and just tell yourself
okay this is an experiment that like
we're gonna sit at the front we're gonna
see what happens
this is not a game that i'm trying to
win
this is a game that i'm trying to learn
right which is how do you climb mmr you
play games not to win necessarily you
play games sometimes to learn like i'm
going to try this thing with
intentionality i'm going to try to buy
more regen in lane and i'm gonna see
what happens
right so whether you win the game or you
lose the game suddenly you've created
some degree of detachment from the
outcome of the game because you know
going in that this could be rough
but you're gonna learn a lot more and
you'll actually shape a scar
and you'll alter your personality as a
result you'll learn
right and so let even if that happens
i i would say that you know 85 chance in
this scenario that your worst fears are
not realized like i know it's kind of a
completely arbitrary percentage but
generally speaking the fears that we
have in our mind are not realized if we
behave with intention what we realize is
that like our fears are way worse in our
mind than usually what reality is
and so even if we do get called on then
just like notice your reaction you'll be
amazed that like what you sort of
realize is like actually doesn't affect
my grade in fact now that i feel stupid
like i i feel either like distracting
myself or studying so now i've got a
choice
do i want to distract myself or do i
want to study well i actually kind of
want to study like i want to feel good
tomorrow when i sit in the class i want
to feel good about like being prepared
to answer questions
right and then so like it's kind of
bizarre but that's like literally how
you change your personality by studying
the reaction you will naturally start
gravitating towards the right thing
because here's the thing sitting at the
back of the class
is actually a strategy to feel good
about yourself
right so like this is the big thing
about you know altering your personality
is that through studying your own
reactions what you can do is essentially
feel the same way but in a more
successful manner so if the goal is to
feel good about myself because that's
why i'm sitting in the back of the class
right i don't want to feel bad about
myself
if i one day make the discovery and this
is done through studying your reactions
that i can sit at the front of the
classroom and feel even better
than what i could if i sat at the back
of the classroom if i'm prepared for
class and i know the right answer
it feels amazing it actually feels
better than sitting at the back of the
classroom
then suddenly what i've done is i've
changed something very important because
all of our avoidance strategies are
there to help us right they're there to
help us avoid pain and feel good about
ourselves but if i suddenly have a
strategy that allows me to feel good
about myself and even feel better than
sitting at the back of the classroom
then i'm gonna actually start picking
that strategy and i know it sounds kind
of weird but i'm gonna start studying
more i'm gonna start preparing for class
and once you make that shift things
become way easier in your life because
not only do you feel better about
yourself but you are starting to be
objectively more successful because
you're making better decisions
and so shaping your personality
ultimately comes down to
understanding your reactions to things
and playing the tape through to the end
and studying as you make an intentional
change in the world
studying what you're how your reaction
changes and as you keep doing this over
and over and over again whether it be
the narcissistic person in psychotherapy
who's sort of like studying their
reaction playing the tape through what
does it truly mean okay like
how would it feel to tell people that
you're vegan next time
oh it actually feels totally fine oh
it's actually easier than like not
telling them and then throwing a fit
afterward and so essentially what what
happens with narcissistic people is they
discover that not being narcissistic is
actually the more winning strategy so
they stop being narcissistic once they
sort of internalize and truly realize
that this is not working well right
and so in that same way if you want to
shape your personality don't focus on
fixing the problem
focus on studying your reaction and then
playing the tape through to the end and
then your third step is going to be
implementing an intentional experiment
where you're like watching your reaction
to that thing and as you start doing
this i guarantee your mmr in real life
will start to climb
questions
someone's asking does dbt work for
narcissism i'm going to go ahead and say
sure
so i think that dbt involves a
a component to mindfulness right which
like the is rooted in meditation in the
yogic tradition and the yogic tradition
was like a cure for narcissism
so you're going to get some deluding
effects because dbt is specifically
focused on bpd so the mindfulness
practices are like you know
geared towards
bpd as opposed to narcissism but there
are some good effects
so i have a different like meditation
regimen for
narcissism than dvt
okay so there's good questions here the
first is how do i change things i can't
control like impulsive emotions
so
nowhere have i said that you should
change your behavior right so you don't
need to control impulsive emotions
what you need to do is pay attention to
your reactions
so once i have an impulsive emotion
there's going to be a reaction that
results in a behavior like you can't
control the emotion that's the whole
point of like understanding the manas is
that you can't control the manas like
you can't control whether you like
pineapple on pizza or you don't like
pineapple on pizza
so your initial response to things is
not something that you can control
what you can adjust is your reactivity
to that initial thing
so when i walk into the room if i have a
some scar that makes me feel like an
idiot every time i walk into a classroom
i cannot control that some scar
the some scar the programming will
activate right i'll walk into the
classroom i'll feel like an idiot what i
can control though is the way that i
react to that stimulus
so i can pay attention i can take a deep
breath i can engage in physiology right
so check out breath and mind and dr k's
guide if you guys haven't
so you can like take a deep breath and
you can say okay we're going to sit at
the front it's going to be terrifying so
be it let me go and sit at the front
terror here we come
and then you can't control the terror
like you're going to feel terror as you
sit down in the front seat you're gonna
be like sweating okay we're gonna
breathe we're gonna breathe and then
you're gonna realize oh my god
i've survived i did it success good job
so you can control the way that react
you react to things but not your initial
thing
not your initial response to something
okay
can you back up your claims with science
yeah so like
this is kind of interesting right so
like
i mean these things are so
so like you can look at the clinical
efficacy of any paper on dbt and
borderline personality disorder
right like if you want to see the
clinical like the scientific
response to this you can also look at
things like mbt
and bpd or narcissism so there's like
tons of research out there about
psychotherapy for personality disorders
which shows that it's effective there's
tons of research out there about
you know five factor model so i would
start with like honestly just wikipedia
and just like look at some of the
references for the five factor model
right and then if you actually go and
you talk to someone who like studies
five factor model like and you ask them
based on five factor can you predict how
an individual will respond in a scenario
they will say no i cannot
they can give you a general idea that
these kinds of people are more likely to
respond this way so this is like super
fundamental stuff
yeah where's my phone
uh i think it's in the
in the where my wallet is
um
okay
how much does this help getting past
mental disabilities
i'm not quite sure so generally speaking
i think this is independent of mental
disabilities so like i don't think it's
mental disabilities apply at all
unless your disability has something to
do with your ability to observe yourself
so the key thing here is that you need
to be able to observe your reaction to
things and if you have difficulty doing
that like that may be a slow road to
climb right
so a good example of this is if you have
very very high emotional reactivity you
may not be able to do this react
studying your reaction to things like
very easily so you may just have to
start with like smaller things right so
you need to grind on weak mobs before
you start to tackle the bigger stuff
um
doesn't being critical to oneself breed
anxiety sure
so there's a key thing
i'm not saying be critical right so
critical is a judgment
we're not talking about being critical
we're talking about observation
so and you're correct that being
critical breeds anxiety because like
then you're beating yourself up and you
feel bad about yourself and you're
worried but observation actually breeds
the opposite right so critical is to
being critical is to make a judgment is
to like conclude something but our
observation is not making a conclusion
it's just making an observation we're
actually super hands off we're just
gonna see what happens
and so by adopting that non-judgmental
error we actually reduce anxiety so you
are correct that being critical
can breed anxiety but we're not being
critical we're being observational we're
studying our reaction
right
so it's actually very different and this
is it's a really good question because
oftentimes when we are self-reflective
we default to a critical mode
right when i study myself all i can see
is criticisms
i'm not truly observational i'm very
harshly self-judgmental
that too
is part of a hum god and a samskar
because i've decided somewhere along the
way that like i'm someone who like
isn't perfect and i can always be better
i can always be better i can always be
better and if that is your identity
of never being satisfied never being
perfect and never being enough then any
kind of reaction that you have to
yourself which you're not even aware of
it becomes so automatic right because
then you're beating yourself up it's
like simple so like it happens like that
oh i could have done this better i could
have done this but i'm so stupid
this person is better than i am that
person is better that's not studying
yourself it's being self-critical
that's the activation of the some squad
it's not actually like observing the the
samskara it's within the some scar if
that makes sense
so like the right thing to do if you're
hyper critical is to observe yourself
and just ask yourself
why am i being so critical of myself
here where do i get the idea that like i
you know i everyone is better than me
like where does that come from
so like play the tape through to the end
like ask yourself why why why why until
you'll get to something at the you know
at the bottom
and this is the kind of thing that you
know if you work with a therapist or
coach or something like that like they
will help you get there faster
therapists aren't really trained in this
model but they do the same work
okay
um
okay so this is a great question so
y'all are asking good questions that are
sort of missing the point how do we
trust that our analysis of our reactions
is correct
great question
so remember the first step is not your
analysis of your reaction
but it's the observation of the reaction
and is the observation of the reaction
if done with that like properly right so
just
so like you know how do you know if your
observation is correct it just is an
observation the analysis is what comes
afterward right so like science doesn't
lie but interpretations are very
critical so you're correct that analysis
needs to be done at some point
but make sure that you understand
clearly that the first step is just data
collection it's just observe your
reaction notice your reaction
as you play the tape through to the end
you know be aware so here's like one tip
which is how emotional or numb do you
feel
if you feel calm when you are doing your
analysis then it is likely that your
analysis is more correct if you feel
emotional it is unlikely that your
analysis will be correct here's another
tricky thing here's the thing that trips
everyone up if you feel numb when you do
your analysis it is unlikely to be
correct
so numbness
is a sign of like a high level of
emotion that is present but is
suppressed so it'll be shaping your your
analysis quite heavily this is the big
problem that people run into when they
think they are hyperlogical
is that they're they're not like it's
not like their limbic system their
emotional cortex of their brain is like
non-functional right it's just being
suppressed but it's still shaping their
thoughts
so the key thing to understand about
analysis is you want your mind to be
calm and balanced
which is what tends to happen when you
guys watch our interviews and stuff when
people have this like emotional
catharsis there's a high level of
emotion which we then process right we
decompress it we don't numb it out and
then afterward people are left in a
space of mind where they like have a
realization and so then you know your
analysis is correct
can you lose some scars the scheme is
due to a stressful amend have in mind
ptsd absolutely right so ptsd is
actually the one diagnosis in the west
that perfectly overlaps with the eastern
concept of the mind
so this is true right like so the mind
works in one way and so i think good
evidence that this is correct is that
the western path of exploration
discovered ptsd the eastern path of
exploration essentially discovered the
same thing so you have two independent
investigators that are arriving at the
same conclusion so what is ptsd i have a
particular event that happens which has
a powerful impact on me which does not
get processed or digested
and then sits in my mind and then arises
in particular scenarios right this is
why people have flashbacks they have
nightmares they have hypervigilance when
they have ptsd their mind is on
constantly on the lookout for like the
source of danger so now our personality
has almost altered right the way that we
react to scenarios has changed
and so that's what ptsd is and the good
news is that there are treatments for
ptsd right you can do psychotherapy
which is literally the process of like
bringing up some of these things and
emotionally digesting them and then you
can no longer have ptsd you can be cured
of it
so ptsd is actually a really really good
example of the fact that some scars can
be cleansed
and if you look at that in in the yogic
process right so like that's a big part
of it so as people you know go and do
spiritual study and stuff like all this
kind of stuff comes up so for me for
example like i originally went to you
know india to become a monk out of ego
because i sucked at real life i was
super low mmr and i was like oh cool
like instead of sucking at this game i'm
gonna go play this game and then like
i'm gonna tell everyone that my game is
better than their game so the way that
i'm gonna feel better
about myself is to become a monk and
then all these materialistic noobs that
get better grades than i do i'm gonna be
better than them because my game is more
important than the their game law is for
noobs and dota is for experts so i'm
going to get good at dota because i suck
at lol and then i'm going to lord it
over all the law noobs for playing la la
la la right so that's what happened in
my mind and as i went through this
process i uncovered that i was like holy
crap
this is all ego like the reason i'm
becoming a monk is out of ego it's like
the fundamentally like wrong decision
so you can sort of discover that your
some scars are like there through
spiritual practice and then you can go
through the process of digesting them so
i realized this i was like oh crap like
i suck at life so that's when i decided
like okay so using a calm and collected
mind i was like
if i become a monk to run away from my
problems that will be running away
so instead what i need to do to really
become a monk is i need to stop
pretending to be a monk go and succeed
in the real world
so i have to go back and like i need to
be the best damn student that ever could
be because that's where i suck so i have
to like focus on the things that i'm bad
at so i ended up going back and like
still lazy right so but the way that i
reacted to things changed
the way that i've like approached school
changed my personality changed whereas i
used to run away from things and i
started like embracing them right i
understood it was gonna be hard i didn't
get a 4.0
i didn't like come back transform that's
the other thing is people like assume
you come back and you're like
transformed and then suddenly you're
getting four points no like my first
semester back i got like a 3.0
3.2 3.4 every semester i got a little
bit better a little bit better a little
bit better graduated with a 2.5
so be it
right i'm not gonna let like i noticed
oh well like this sucks okay so like i'm
gonna acknowledge that it sucks i'm
gonna notice my reaction and i'm gonna
take the right steps forward
irrespective of how i feel
and that's when your personality changes
right so then i got into medical school
at tufts
did that for a while you know noticed
some ego at the beginning of that and i
was like okay i need to step aside from
that
just going to focus on doing what i need
to do
notice my reactions to things
decide how how much i'm going to study
ironically i didn't like try to be the
best in my class because i was like
that's ego
i'm here to learn medicine so i'm going
to study what i'm capable of okay i
can't study for eight hours a day so i
can study for like two three hours a day
that's the most i'm capable of and
instead of sort of assuming that that
means oh god i'm gonna fail it's like
okay like let's see what happens let's
observe what happens if i can study for
two hours a day can i optimize that
studying for two hours and can it be
enough can i pass
turns out i can do way better than pass
right so then it's bizarre like using
that kind of strategy ending up with
like an award of academic achievement at
the end of medical school
and so
first academic achievement award i've
gotten after a string of like c's and
d's and
f's and crap like that
right
so just focus on your reactions
understand yourself and then you will
naturally start to move in the right
direction
and you can absolutely alter ptsd and
you can absolutely alter
like you can alter it
right
that's the whole point of this lecture
is that that which you assume you are
can be changed and the way to change it
is to understand your reactions
because your reactions and how you
process
that individual moment is going to form
how you behave tomorrow
so pay attention to your reactions
i'm going to give y'all one last story
about this okay
so i had a
um
a patient
who
[Music]
whose mom
was in an abusive relationship
so mom and dad dad was abusive
mom and dad divorce
uh mom
is a way to process all of these like
difficult emotional things
started going to church
and then became like hyper religious so
like her entire personality like changed
over the course of like
five to seven years
and then my patient had all kinds of
problems because mom would like pressure
them to go to church all the time
because for mom church was like there
for her and was her source of like
comfort and safety and salvation when
she was going through a really really
hard time
and so then suddenly like for mom the
world became a dangerous place where
like there are like people out there who
don't have morals who will do to you
what your dad did to me
but in the church i found safety and so
she became super paranoid for her
daughter
and was like you need to go to church
like don't date anyone outside of church
you need to go to church like church is
the only safe place
right that's basically like what her mom
kind of like she didn't realize that
like consciously
but that's what through therapy we sort
of uncovered and once like daughter
understood this she was like okay like
this was the way that my mom survived
this experience this is how she's
changed and shaped
like she's been altered by this and
church was like kind of there for her
right so that's an example of a powerful
some scar forming
and as a result a personality change
and then like that personality views the
rest of the world as dangerous except
there's one safe space
and so of course she's gonna push her
daughter to like be in that safe space
because she doesn't want her daughter to
ever end up in a relationship like she
she had
and so once daughter understood that
when she understood where she's coming
from like that started to like she
started to get a lot better she
understood you know why her mom was so
pushy for church she was able to set
boundaries with her mom in a much
healthier way now that she understood
everything and then her own reactions
towards her mom started to change her
own reactions towards church and like
not church and things like that started
to change
so personality can absolutely be altered
it comes from understanding your
reaction
okay
you